# eDNA-Preservation

This repository contains the R code, relevant data, and DNA extraction protocols for the manuscript "Evaluation of Preservation and Extraction Methods on eDNA Yield and Detection Probability after Long-term Storage" in which three experiments were conducted to compare the efficacy of different preservation media, storage temperatures, and DNA extraction methods on long-term storage of filtered eDNA samples collected from freshwater aquariums housing adult Eastern Hellbenders, an imperiled giant aquatic salamander.

In Experiment 1, generalized linear mixed effects models were used to assess the effect of long-term storage (1 year) on eDNA yield and detection probability under six preservation treatments: Freezing filters without buffer at -20C and -80C, storing in ethanol at 4C and -20C, and storing in Longmire's lysis buffer at 4C and room temperature. Frozen and ethanol-preserved filters were extracting using a Qiagen DNeasy Blood & Tissue kit while Longmire's samples were extracted by using a phenol-chloroform-isoamyl (PCI) method. The R code for this experiment can be run by importing the 'eDNA.Concentrations_Pres.Exp.I.csv' and 'Detections_PresExpI.csv' files.

In Experiment 2, a crossed-experimental design was applied to Longmire's and ethanol-preserved filters to compare the efficacy of DNA extractions using the Qiagen DNeasy Blood & Tissue kit and PCI methods. The R code for this experiment can be run by importing the 'eDNA.Concentrations_PresExpII.csv' and 'detections_presII.csv' files.

In Experiment 3, linear mixed effects models were used to compare the efficacy of four preservation treatments over 4-years of storage: Freezing filters without buffer at -20C and -80C, and storing filters in ethanol at 4C and room temperature. All four treatments were extracted by using the Qiagen DNeasy Blood & Tissue kit. The R code for this experiment can be run by importing the 'eDNA.Concentrations_PresExpIII.csv' and 'detections_epx3.csv' files.
